README-BUILD.md, before:

# How to build the xPack GNU Arm Embedded GCC?

## Introduction

This project includes the scripts and additional files required to
build and publish the
[xPack GNU Arm Embedded GCC](https://xpack.github.io/arm-none-eabi-gcc/) binaries.

The build scripts use the
[xPack Build Box (XBB)](https://github.com/xpack/xpack-build-box),
a set of elaborate build environments based on GCC 7.4 (Docker containers
for GNU/Linux and Windows or a custom folder for MacOS).

## Repository URLs

The build scripts use Arm archives; occasionally, to avoid bugs, original
repositories are used:

- `git://sourceware.org/git/binutils-gdb.git`

## Download the build scripts

The build scripts are available in the `scripts` folder of the
[`xpack-dev-tools/arm-none-eabi-gcc-xpack`](https://github.com/xpack-dev-tools/arm-none-eabi-gcc-xpack)
Git repo.

To download them, the following shortcut is available:

```console
$ curl --fail -L https://github.com/xpack-dev-tools/arm-none-eabi-gcc-xpack/raw/xpack/scripts/git-clone.sh | bash
```

This small script issues the following two commands:

```console
$ rm -rf ~/Downloads/arm-none-eabi-gcc-xpack.git
$ git clone --recurse-submodules https://github.com/xpack-dev-tools/arm-none-eabi-gcc-xpack.git \
  ~/Downloads/arm-none-eabi-gcc-xpack.git
```

> Note: the repository uses submodules; for a successful build it is
> mandatory to recurse the submodules.

## The `Work` folder

The script creates a temporary build `Work/arm-none-eabi-gcc-${version}`
folder in the user home. Although not recommended, if for any reasons
you need to change the location of the `Work` folder,
you can redefine `WORK_FOLDER_PATH` variable before invoking the script.

## Customizations

There are many other settings that can be redefined via
environment variables. If necessary,
place them in a file and pass it via `--env-file`. This file is
either passed to Docker or sourced to shell. The Docker syntax
**is not** identical to shell, so some files may
not be accepted by bash.

## How to build distributions

### Prerequisites

The prerequisites are common to all binary builds. Please follow the
instructions from the separate
[Prerequisites for building xPack binaries](https://xpack.github.io/xbb/prerequisites/)
page and return when ready.

## Update git repos

The xPack GNU Arm Embedded GCC distribution follows the official
[Arm](https://developer.arm.com/open-source/gnu-toolchain/gnu-rm)
distribution, and it is planned to make a new release after each future
Arm release.

Currently the build procedure uses the _Source Invariant_ archive and
the configure options are the same as in the Arm build scripts.

## Prepare release

To prepare a new release:

- download the new _Source Invariant_ archive
- copy/paste the files and override the `arm-gcc-original-scripts.git` files
  (except the PDF);
- commit with a message like **8-2018-q4-major**; also add a tag;
- check differences from the previous version;
- determine the GCC version (like `8.2.1`) and update the `scripts/VERSION`
  file; the format is `8.2.1-1.8`. The fourth digit is the number of the
  Arm release of the same GCC version, and the fifth digit is the xPack
  GNU Arm Embedded GCC release number of this version.
- add a new set of definitions in the `scripts/container-build.sh`, with
  the versions of various components;
- if newer libraries are used, check if they are available from the local git
  cache project.

### Check `README.md`

Normally `README.md` should not need changes, but better check.
Information related to the new version should not be included here,
but in the version specific file (below).

### Create `README-<version>.md`

In the `scripts` folder create a copy of the previous one and update the
Git commit and possible other details.

## Update `CHANGELOG.md`

Check `CHANGELOG.md` and add the new release.

## Build

Although it is perfectly possible to build all binaries in a single step
on a macOS system, due to Docker specifics, it is faster to build the
GNU/Linux and Windows binaries on a GNU/Linux system and the macOS binary
separately.

### Build the GNU/Linux and Windows binaries

The current platform for GNU/Linux and Windows production builds is an
Ubuntu Server 18 LTS, running on an Intel NUC8i7BEH mini PC with 32 GB of RAM
and 512 GB of fast M.2 SSD.

```console
$ ssh ilg-xbb-linux.local
```

Before starting a multi-platform build, check if Docker is started:

```console
$ docker info
```

Eventually run the test image:

```console
$ docker run hello-world
```

Before running a build for the first time, it is recommended to preload the
docker images.

```console
$ bash ~/Downloads/arm-none-eabi-gcc-xpack.git/scripts/build.sh preload-images
```

The result should look similar to:

```console
$ docker images
REPOSITORY TAG IMAGE ID CREATED SIZE
REPOSITORY          TAG                 IMAGE ID            CREATED             SIZE
ilegeul/centos32    6-xbb-v2.2          956eb2963946        5 weeks ago         3.03GB
ilegeul/centos      6-xbb-v2.2          6b1234f2ac44        5 weeks ago         3.12GB
hello-world         latest              fce289e99eb9        5 months ago        1.84kB
```

It is also recommended to Remove unused Docker space. This is mostly useful
after failed builds, during development, when dangling images may be left
by Docker.

To check the content of a Docker image:

```console
$ docker run --interactive --tty ilegeul/centos:6-xbb-v2.2
```

To remove unused files:

```console
$ docker system prune --force
```

To download the build scripts:

```console
$ curl --fail -L https://github.com/xpack-dev-tools/arm-none-eabi-gcc-xpack/raw/xpack/scripts/git-clone.sh | bash
```

To build both the 32/64-bit Windows and GNU/Linux versions, use `--all`; to
build selectively, use `--linux64 --win64` or `--linux32 --win32` (GNU/Linux
can be built alone; Windows also requires the GNU/Linux build).

Since the build takes a while, use `screen` to isolate the build session
from unexpected events, like a broken
network connection or a computer entering sleep.

```console
$ screen -S arm

$ sudo rm -rf ~/Work/arm-none-eabi-gcc-*
$ bash ~/Downloads/arm-none-eabi-gcc-xpack.git/scripts/build.sh --all --jobs 8
```

To detach from the session, use `Ctrl-a` `Ctrl-d`; to reattach use
`screen -r arm`; to kill the session use `Ctrl-a` `Ctrl-k` and confirm.

Several hours later, the output of the build script is a set of 4 files and
their SHA signatures, created in the `deploy` folder:

```console
$ ls -l deploy
total 487380
-rw-r--r-- 1 ilg ilg 115361011 Jul 26 11:57 xpack-arm-none-eabi-gcc-8.2.1-1.8-linux-x32.tgz
-rw-r--r-- 1 ilg ilg       114 Jul 26 11:57 xpack-arm-none-eabi-gcc-8.2.1-1.8-linux-x32.tgz.sha
-rw-r--r-- 1 ilg ilg 113706069 Jul 26 11:55 xpack-arm-none-eabi-gcc-8.2.1-1.8-linux-x64.tgz
-rw-r--r-- 1 ilg ilg       114 Jul 26 11:55 xpack-arm-none-eabi-gcc-8.2.1-1.8-linux-x64.tgz.sha
-rw-r--r-- 1 ilg ilg 130202357 Jul 26 11:58 xpack-arm-none-eabi-gcc-8.2.1-1.8-win32-x32.zip
-rw-r--r-- 1 ilg ilg       114 Jul 26 11:58 xpack-arm-none-eabi-gcc-8.2.1-1.8-win32-x32.zip.sha
-rw-r--r-- 1 ilg ilg 139768099 Jul 26 11:56 xpack-arm-none-eabi-gcc-8.2.1-1.8-win32-x64.zip
-rw-r--r-- 1 ilg ilg       114 Jul 26 11:56 xpack-arm-none-eabi-gcc-8.2.1-1.8-win32-x64.zip.sha
```

To copy the files from the build machine to the current development
machine, either use NFS to mount the entire folder, or open the `deploy`
folder in a terminal and use `scp`:

```console
$ cd ~/Work/arm-none-eabi-gcc-*/deploy
$ scp * ilg@ilg-wks.local:Downloads/xpack-binaries/arm
```

### Build the macOS binary

The current platform for macOS production builds is a macOS 10.10.5
VirtualBox image running on the same macMini with 16 GB of RAM and a
fast SSD.

```console
$ ssh ilg-xbb-mac.local
```
To download them, the following shortcut is available:

```console
$ curl --fail -L https://github.com/xpack-dev-tools/arm-none-eabi-gcc-xpack/raw/xpack/scripts/git-clone.sh | bash
```

To build the latest macOS version:

```console
$ screen -S arm

$ sudo rm -rf ~/Work/arm-none-eabi-gcc-*
$ caffeinate bash ~/Downloads/arm-none-eabi-gcc-xpack.git/scripts/build.sh --osx --jobs 8
```

To detach from the session, use `Ctrl-a` `Ctrl-d`; to reattach use
`screen -r arm`; to kill the session use `Ctrl-a` `Ctrl-k` and confirm.

Several hours later, the output of the build script is a compressed archive
and its SHA signature, created in the `deploy` folder:

```console
$ ls -l deploy
total 215648
-rw-r--r--  1 ilg  staff  110404277 Jul 26 13:29 xpack-arm-none-eabi-gcc-8.2.1-1.8-darwin-x64.tgz
-rw-r--r--  1 ilg  staff        115 Jul 26 13:29 xpack-arm-none-eabi-gcc-8.2.1-1.8-darwin-x64.tgz.sha
```

To copy the files from the build machine to the current development
machine, either use NFS to mount the entire folder, or open the `deploy`
folder in a terminal and use `scp`:

```console
$ cd ~/Work/arm-none-eabi-gcc-*/deploy
$ scp * ilg@ilg-wks.local:Downloads/xpack-binaries/arm
```

## Run a test build on macOS

Before starting the builds on the dedicated machines, run a quick test on
the local development workstation.

```console
$ caffeinate bash ~/Downloads/arm-none-eabi-gcc-xpack.git/scripts/build.sh --osx --disable-multilib --develop --jobs 12
```

This should check the commit IDs and the tag names in all the refered
repositories, and the build scripts.

It is _quick_ because it does not build the multilibs. Even so, on a
fast machine, it takes about one hour.

## Subsequent runs

### Separate platform specific builds

Instead of `--all`, you can use any combination of:

```
--win32 --win64 --linux32 --linux64
```

Please note that, due to the specifics of the GCC build process, the
Windows build requires the corresponding GNU/Linux build, so `--win32`
alone is equivalent to `--linux32 --win32` and `--win64` alone is
equivalent to `--linux64 --win64`.

### clean

To remove most build files, use:

```console
$ bash ~/Downloads/arm-none-eabi-gcc-xpack.git/scripts/build.sh clean
```

To also remove the repository and the output files, use:

```console
$ bash ~/Downloads/arm-none-eabi-gcc-xpack.git/scripts/build.sh cleanall
```

For production builds it is recommended to completely remove the build folder.

### --develop

For performance reasons, the actual build folders are internal to each
Docker run, and are not persistent. This gives the best speed, but has
the disadvantage that interrupted builds cannot be resumed.

For development builds, it is possible to define the build folders in the
host file system, and resume an interrupted build.

### --debug

For development builds, it is also possible to create everything
with `-g -O0` and be able to run debug sessions.

### --jobs

By default, the build steps use a single job at a time, but for
recent CPUs with multiple cores it is possible to run multiple jobs
in parallel.

The setting applies to all steps.

Warning: Parallel builds require significant system resources and occasionally
may crash the build.

### Interrupted builds

The Docker scripts run with root privileges. This is generally not a
problem, since at the end of the script the output files are reassigned
to the actual user.

However, for an interrupted build, this step is skipped, and files in
the install folder will remain owned by root. Thus, before removing the
build folder, it might be necessary to run a recursive `chown`.

### Rebuild previous releases

Although not guaranteed to work, previous versions can be re-built by
explicitly specifying the version:

```console
$ RELEASE_VERSION=7.3.1-1.2 bash ~/Downloads/arm-none-eabi-gcc-xpack.git/scripts/build.sh --all --jobs 8
$ RELEASE_VERSION=8.3.1-1.1 bash ~/Downloads/arm-none-eabi-gcc-xpack.git/scripts/build.sh --all --jobs 8
```

> Note: This procedure builds a previous release but in the context of
the latest build environment, which might be different from the one used
at the time of the release, so the result may be slightly different; to
obtain exactly the same result, use the commit tagged with the desired
release.

## Test

A simple test is performed by the script at the end, by launching the
executables to check if all shared/dynamic libraries are correctly used.

For a true test you need to unpack the archive in a temporary location
(like `~/Downloads`) and then run the
program from there. For example on macOS the output should
look like:

```console
$ /Users/ilg/Downloads/xPacks/arm-none-eabi-gcc/8.2.1-1.8/bin/arm-none-eabi-gcc --version
arm-none-eabi-gcc (xPack GNU Arm Embedded GCC, 64-bit) 8.2.1 20170904 (release) [ARM/embedded-7-branch revision 255204]
```

## Installed folders

After install, the package should create a structure like this (only the
first two depth levels are shown):

```console
$ tree -L 2 /Users/ilg/Library/xPacks/\@xpack-dev-tools/arm-none-eabi-gcc/8.2.1-1.8/.content/
/Users/ilg/Library/xPacks/\@xpack-dev-tools/arm-none-eabi-gcc/8.2.1-1.8/.content/
├── README.md
├── arm-none-eabi
│   ├── bin
│   ├── include
│   ├── lib
│   └── share
├── bin
│   ├── arm-none-eabi-addr2line
│   ├── arm-none-eabi-ar
│   ├── arm-none-eabi-as
│   ├── arm-none-eabi-c++
│   ├── arm-none-eabi-c++filt
│   ├── arm-none-eabi-cpp
│   ├── arm-none-eabi-elfedit
│   ├── arm-none-eabi-g++
│   ├── arm-none-eabi-gcc
│   ├── arm-none-eabi-gcc-8.2.1
│   ├── arm-none-eabi-gcc-ar
│   ├── arm-none-eabi-gcc-nm
│   ├── arm-none-eabi-gcc-ranlib
│   ├── arm-none-eabi-gcov
│   ├── arm-none-eabi-gcov-dump
│   ├── arm-none-eabi-gcov-tool
│   ├── arm-none-eabi-gdb
│   ├── arm-none-eabi-gdb-add-index
│   ├── arm-none-eabi-gdb-add-index-py
│   ├── arm-none-eabi-gdb-py
│   ├── arm-none-eabi-gprof
│   ├── arm-none-eabi-ld
│   ├── arm-none-eabi-ld.bfd
│   ├── arm-none-eabi-nm
│   ├── arm-none-eabi-objcopy
│   ├── arm-none-eabi-objdump
│   ├── arm-none-eabi-ranlib
│   ├── arm-none-eabi-readelf
│   ├── arm-none-eabi-size
│   ├── arm-none-eabi-strings
│   └── arm-none-eabi-strip
├── distro-info
│   ├── CHANGELOG.md
│   ├── arm-readme.txt
│   ├── arm-release.txt
│   ├── licenses
│   ├── patches
│   └── scripts
├── include
│   └── gdb
├── lib
│   ├── gcc
│   ├── libcc1.0.so
│   └── libcc1.so -> libcc1.0.so
├── libexec
│   └── gcc
└── share
    ├── doc
    └── gcc-arm-none-eabi

19 directories, 37 files
```

No other files are installed in any system folders or other locations.

## Uninstall

The binaries are distributed as portable archives; thus they do not
need to run a setup and do not require an uninstall.

## Files cache

The XBB build scripts use a local cache such that files are downloaded only
during the first run, later runs being able to use the cached files.

However, occasionally some servers may not be available, and the builds
may fail.

The workaround is to manually download the files from an alternate
location (like
https://github.com/xpack-dev-tools/files-cache/tree/master/libs),
place them in the XBB cache (`Work/cache`) and restart the build.

## Pitfalls

### Parallel builds

For various reasons, in some environments, parallel builds for
some components fail. Reduce the number of parallel jobs until
the build passes.

### Building GDB on macOS

GDB uses a complex and custom logic to unwind the stack when processing
exceptions; macOS also uses a custom logic to organize memory and process
exceptions; the result is that when compiling GDB with GCC on older macOS
systems (like 10.10), some details do not match and the resulting GDB
crashes with an assertion on the first `set language` command (most
probably many other commands).

The workaround was to compile GDB with Apple clang, which resulted in
functional binaries, even on the old macOS 10.10.

## More build details

The build process is split into several scripts. The build starts on the
host, with `build.sh`, which runs `container-build.sh` several times,
once for each target, in one of the two docker containers. Both scripts
include several other helper scripts. The entire process is quite complex,
and an attempt to explain its functionality in a few words would not
be realistic. Thus, the authoritative source of details remains the source
code.

Commit message:

README-BUILD: document git-clone-develop.sh

README-BUILD.md, after:

# How to build the xPack GNU Arm Embedded GCC?

## Introduction

This project includes the scripts and additional files required to
build and publish the
[xPack GNU Arm Embedded GCC](https://xpack.github.io/arm-none-eabi-gcc/) binaries.

The build scripts use the
[xPack Build Box (XBB)](https://github.com/xpack/xpack-build-box),
a set of elaborate build environments based on GCC 7.4 (Docker containers
for GNU/Linux and Windows or a custom folder for MacOS).

## Repository URLs

The build scripts use Arm archives; occasionally, to avoid bugs, original
repositories are used:

- `git://sourceware.org/git/binutils-gdb.git`

## Download the build scripts

The build scripts are available in the `scripts` folder of the
[`xpack-dev-tools/arm-none-eabi-gcc-xpack`](https://github.com/xpack-dev-tools/arm-none-eabi-gcc-xpack)
Git repo.

To download them, the following shortcut is available:

```console
$ curl --fail -L https://github.com/xpack-dev-tools/arm-none-eabi-gcc-xpack/raw/xpack/scripts/git-clone.sh | bash
```

This small script issues the following two commands:

```console
$ rm -rf ~/Downloads/arm-none-eabi-gcc-xpack.git
$ git clone --recurse-submodules https://github.com/xpack-dev-tools/arm-none-eabi-gcc-xpack.git \
  ~/Downloads/arm-none-eabi-gcc-xpack.git
```

> Note: the repository uses submodules; for a successful build it is
> mandatory to recurse the submodules.

For development purposes, there is a shortcut to clone the `xpack-develop`
branch:

```console
$ curl --fail -L https://github.com/xpack-dev-tools/arm-none-eabi-gcc-xpack/raw/xpack/scripts/git-clone-develop.sh | bash
```

## The `Work` folder

The script creates a temporary build `Work/arm-none-eabi-gcc-${version}`
folder in the user home. Although not recommended, if for any reasons
you need to change the location of the `Work` folder,
you can redefine `WORK_FOLDER_PATH` variable before invoking the script.

## Customizations

There are many other settings that can be redefined via
environment variables. If necessary,
place them in a file and pass it via `--env-file`. This file is
either passed to Docker or sourced to shell. The Docker syntax
**is not** identical to shell, so some files may
not be accepted by bash.

## How to build distributions

### Prerequisites

The prerequisites are common to all binary builds. Please follow the
instructions from the separate
[Prerequisites for building xPack binaries](https://xpack.github.io/xbb/prerequisites/)
page and return when ready.

## Update git repos

The xPack GNU Arm Embedded GCC distribution follows the official
[Arm](https://developer.arm.com/open-source/gnu-toolchain/gnu-rm)
distribution, and it is planned to make a new release after each future
Arm release.

Currently the build procedure uses the _Source Invariant_ archive and
the configure options are the same as in the Arm build scripts.

## Prepare release

To prepare a new release:

- download the new _Source Invariant_ archive
- copy/paste the files and override the `arm-gcc-original-scripts.git` files
  (except the PDF);
- commit with a message like **8-2018-q4-major**; also add a tag;
- check differences from the previous version;
- determine the GCC version (like `8.2.1`) and update the `scripts/VERSION`
  file; the format is `8.2.1-1.8`. The fourth digit is the number of the
  Arm release of the same GCC version, and the fifth digit is the xPack
  GNU Arm Embedded GCC release number of this version.
- add a new set of definitions in the `scripts/container-build.sh`, with
  the versions of various components;
- if newer libraries are used, check if they are available from the local git
  cache project.

### Check `README.md`

Normally `README.md` should not need changes, but better check.
Information related to the new version should not be included here,
but in the version specific file (below).

### Create `README-<version>.md`

In the `scripts` folder create a copy of the previous one and update the
Git commit and possible other details.

## Update `CHANGELOG.md`

Check `CHANGELOG.md` and add the new release.

## Build

Although it is perfectly possible to build all binaries in a single step
on a macOS system, due to Docker specifics, it is faster to build the
GNU/Linux and Windows binaries on a GNU/Linux system and the macOS binary
separately.

### Build the GNU/Linux and Windows binaries

The current platform for GNU/Linux and Windows production builds is an
Ubuntu Server 18 LTS, running on an Intel NUC8i7BEH mini PC with 32 GB of RAM
and 512 GB of fast M.2 SSD.

```console
$ ssh ilg-xbb-linux.local
```

Before starting a multi-platform build, check if Docker is started:

```console
$ docker info
```

Eventually run the test image:

```console
$ docker run hello-world
```

Before running a build for the first time, it is recommended to preload the
docker images.

```console
$ bash ~/Downloads/arm-none-eabi-gcc-xpack.git/scripts/build.sh preload-images
```

The result should look similar to:

```console
$ docker images
REPOSITORY TAG IMAGE ID CREATED SIZE
REPOSITORY          TAG                 IMAGE ID            CREATED             SIZE
ilegeul/centos32    6-xbb-v2.2          956eb2963946        5 weeks ago         3.03GB
ilegeul/centos      6-xbb-v2.2          6b1234f2ac44        5 weeks ago         3.12GB
hello-world         latest              fce289e99eb9        5 months ago        1.84kB
```

It is also recommended to Remove unused Docker space. This is mostly useful
after failed builds, during development, when dangling images may be left
by Docker.

To check the content of a Docker image:

```console
$ docker run --interactive --tty ilegeul/centos:6-xbb-v2.2
```

To remove unused files:

```console
$ docker system prune --force
```

To download the build scripts:

```console
$ curl --fail -L https://github.com/xpack-dev-tools/arm-none-eabi-gcc-xpack/raw/xpack/scripts/git-clone.sh | bash
```

To build both the 32/64-bit Windows and GNU/Linux versions, use `--all`; to
build selectively, use `--linux64 --win64` or `--linux32 --win32` (GNU/Linux
can be built alone; Windows also requires the GNU/Linux build).

Since the build takes a while, use `screen` to isolate the build session
from unexpected events, like a broken
network connection or a computer entering sleep.

```console
$ screen -S arm

$ sudo rm -rf ~/Work/arm-none-eabi-gcc-*
$ bash ~/Downloads/arm-none-eabi-gcc-xpack.git/scripts/build.sh --all --jobs 8
```

To detach from the session, use `Ctrl-a` `Ctrl-d`; to reattach use
`screen -r arm`; to kill the session use `Ctrl-a` `Ctrl-k` and confirm.

Several hours later, the output of the build script is a set of 4 files and
their SHA signatures, created in the `deploy` folder:

```console
$ ls -l deploy
total 487380
-rw-r--r-- 1 ilg ilg 115361011 Jul 26 11:57 xpack-arm-none-eabi-gcc-8.2.1-1.8-linux-x32.tgz
-rw-r--r-- 1 ilg ilg       114 Jul 26 11:57 xpack-arm-none-eabi-gcc-8.2.1-1.8-linux-x32.tgz.sha
-rw-r--r-- 1 ilg ilg 113706069 Jul 26 11:55 xpack-arm-none-eabi-gcc-8.2.1-1.8-linux-x64.tgz
-rw-r--r-- 1 ilg ilg       114 Jul 26 11:55 xpack-arm-none-eabi-gcc-8.2.1-1.8-linux-x64.tgz.sha
-rw-r--r-- 1 ilg ilg 130202357 Jul 26 11:58 xpack-arm-none-eabi-gcc-8.2.1-1.8-win32-x32.zip
-rw-r--r-- 1 ilg ilg       114 Jul 26 11:58 xpack-arm-none-eabi-gcc-8.2.1-1.8-win32-x32.zip.sha
-rw-r--r-- 1 ilg ilg 139768099 Jul 26 11:56 xpack-arm-none-eabi-gcc-8.2.1-1.8-win32-x64.zip
-rw-r--r-- 1 ilg ilg       114 Jul 26 11:56 xpack-arm-none-eabi-gcc-8.2.1-1.8-win32-x64.zip.sha
```

To copy the files from the build machine to the current development
machine, either use NFS to mount the entire folder, or open the `deploy`
folder in a terminal and use `scp`:

```console
$ cd ~/Work/arm-none-eabi-gcc-*/deploy
$ scp * ilg@ilg-wks.local:Downloads/xpack-binaries/arm
```

### Build the macOS binary

The current platform for macOS production builds is a macOS 10.10.5
VirtualBox image running on the same macMini with 16 GB of RAM and a
fast SSD.

```console
$ ssh ilg-xbb-mac.local
```
To download them, the following shortcut is available:

```console
$ curl --fail -L https://github.com/xpack-dev-tools/arm-none-eabi-gcc-xpack/raw/xpack/scripts/git-clone.sh | bash
```

To build the latest macOS version:

```console
$ screen -S arm

$ sudo rm -rf ~/Work/arm-none-eabi-gcc-*
$ caffeinate bash ~/Downloads/arm-none-eabi-gcc-xpack.git/scripts/build.sh --osx --jobs 8
```

To detach from the session, use `Ctrl-a` `Ctrl-d`; to reattach use
`screen -r arm`; to kill the session use `Ctrl-a` `Ctrl-k` and confirm.

Several hours later, the output of the build script is a compressed archive
and its SHA signature, created in the `deploy` folder:

```console
$ ls -l deploy
total 215648
-rw-r--r--  1 ilg  staff  110404277 Jul 26 13:29 xpack-arm-none-eabi-gcc-8.2.1-1.8-darwin-x64.tgz
-rw-r--r--  1 ilg  staff        115 Jul 26 13:29 xpack-arm-none-eabi-gcc-8.2.1-1.8-darwin-x64.tgz.sha
```

To copy the files from the build machine to the current development
machine, either use NFS to mount the entire folder, or open the `deploy`
folder in a terminal and use `scp`:

```console
$ cd ~/Work/arm-none-eabi-gcc-*/deploy
$ scp * ilg@ilg-wks.local:Downloads/xpack-binaries/arm
```

## Run a test build on macOS

Before starting the builds on the dedicated machines, run a quick test on
the local development workstation.

```console
$ caffeinate bash ~/Downloads/arm-none-eabi-gcc-xpack.git/scripts/build.sh --osx --disable-multilib --develop --jobs 12
```

This should check the commit IDs and the tag names in all the refered
repositories, and the build scripts.

It is _quick_ because it does not build the multilibs. Even so, on a
fast machine, it takes about one hour.

## Subsequent runs

### Separate platform specific builds

Instead of `--all`, you can use any combination of:

```
--win32 --win64 --linux32 --linux64
```

Please note that, due to the specifics of the GCC build process, the
Windows build requires the corresponding GNU/Linux build, so `--win32`
alone is equivalent to `--linux32 --win32` and `--win64` alone is
equivalent to `--linux64 --win64`.

### clean

To remove most build files, use:

```console
$ bash ~/Downloads/arm-none-eabi-gcc-xpack.git/scripts/build.sh clean
```

To also remove the repository and the output files, use:

```console
$ bash ~/Downloads/arm-none-eabi-gcc-xpack.git/scripts/build.sh cleanall
```

For production builds it is recommended to completely remove the build folder.

### --develop

For performance reasons, the actual build folders are internal to each
Docker run, and are not persistent. This gives the best speed, but has
the disadvantage that interrupted builds cannot be resumed.

For development builds, it is possible to define the build folders in the
host file system, and resume an interrupted build.

### --debug

For development builds, it is also possible to create everything
with `-g -O0` and be able to run debug sessions.

### --jobs

By default, the build steps use a single job at a time, but for
recent CPUs with multiple cores it is possible to run multiple jobs
in parallel.

The setting applies to all steps.

Warning: Parallel builds require significant system resources and occasionally
may crash the build.

### Interrupted builds

The Docker scripts run with root privileges. This is generally not a
problem, since at the end of the script the output files are reassigned
to the actual user.

However, for an interrupted build, this step is skipped, and files in
the install folder will remain owned by root. Thus, before removing the
build folder, it might be necessary to run a recursive `chown`.

### Rebuild previous releases

Although not guaranteed to work, previous versions can be re-built by
explicitly specifying the version:

```console
$ RELEASE_VERSION=7.3.1-1.2 bash ~/Downloads/arm-none-eabi-gcc-xpack.git/scripts/build.sh --all --jobs 8
$ RELEASE_VERSION=8.3.1-1.1 bash ~/Downloads/arm-none-eabi-gcc-xpack.git/scripts/build.sh --all --jobs 8
```

> Note: This procedure builds a previous release but in the context of
the latest build environment, which might be different from the one used
at the time of the release, so the result may be slightly different; to
obtain exactly the same result, use the commit tagged with the desired
release.

## Test

A simple test is performed by the script at the end, by launching the
executables to check if all shared/dynamic libraries are correctly used.

For a true test you need to unpack the archive in a temporary location
(like `~/Downloads`) and then run the
program from there. For example on macOS the output should
look like:

```console
$ /Users/ilg/Downloads/xPacks/arm-none-eabi-gcc/8.2.1-1.8/bin/arm-none-eabi-gcc --version
arm-none-eabi-gcc (xPack GNU Arm Embedded GCC, 64-bit) 8.2.1 20170904 (release) [ARM/embedded-7-branch revision 255204]
```

## Installed folders

After install, the package should create a structure like this (only the
first two depth levels are shown):

```console
$ tree -L 2 /Users/ilg/Library/xPacks/\@xpack-dev-tools/arm-none-eabi-gcc/8.2.1-1.8/.content/
/Users/ilg/Library/xPacks/\@xpack-dev-tools/arm-none-eabi-gcc/8.2.1-1.8/.content/
├── README.md
├── arm-none-eabi
│   ├── bin
│   ├── include
│   ├── lib
│   └── share
├── bin
│   ├── arm-none-eabi-addr2line
│   ├── arm-none-eabi-ar
│   ├── arm-none-eabi-as
│   ├── arm-none-eabi-c++
│   ├── arm-none-eabi-c++filt
│   ├── arm-none-eabi-cpp
│   ├── arm-none-eabi-elfedit
│   ├── arm-none-eabi-g++
│   ├── arm-none-eabi-gcc
│   ├── arm-none-eabi-gcc-8.2.1
│   ├── arm-none-eabi-gcc-ar
│   ├── arm-none-eabi-gcc-nm
│   ├── arm-none-eabi-gcc-ranlib
│   ├── arm-none-eabi-gcov
│   ├── arm-none-eabi-gcov-dump
│   ├── arm-none-eabi-gcov-tool
│   ├── arm-none-eabi-gdb
│   ├── arm-none-eabi-gdb-add-index
│   ├── arm-none-eabi-gdb-add-index-py
│   ├── arm-none-eabi-gdb-py
│   ├── arm-none-eabi-gprof
│   ├── arm-none-eabi-ld
│   ├── arm-none-eabi-ld.bfd
│   ├── arm-none-eabi-nm
│   ├── arm-none-eabi-objcopy
│   ├── arm-none-eabi-objdump
│   ├── arm-none-eabi-ranlib
│   ├── arm-none-eabi-readelf
│   ├── arm-none-eabi-size
│   ├── arm-none-eabi-strings
│   └── arm-none-eabi-strip
├── distro-info
│   ├── CHANGELOG.md
│   ├── arm-readme.txt
│   ├── arm-release.txt
│   ├── licenses
│   ├── patches
│   └── scripts
├── include
│   └── gdb
├── lib
│   ├── gcc
│   ├── libcc1.0.so
│   └── libcc1.so -> libcc1.0.so
├── libexec
│   └── gcc
└── share
    ├── doc
    └── gcc-arm-none-eabi

19 directories, 37 files
```

No other files are installed in any system folders or other locations.

## Uninstall

The binaries are distributed as portable archives; thus they do not
need to run a setup and do not require an uninstall.

## Files cache

The XBB build scripts use a local cache such that files are downloaded only
during the first run, later runs being able to use the cached files.

However, occasionally some servers may not be available, and the builds
may fail.

The workaround is to manually download the files from an alternate
location (like
https://github.com/xpack-dev-tools/files-cache/tree/master/libs),
place them in the XBB cache (`Work/cache`) and restart the build.

## Pitfalls

### Parallel builds

For various reasons, in some environments, parallel builds for
some components fail. Reduce the number of parallel jobs until
the build passes.

### Building GDB on macOS

GDB uses a complex and custom logic to unwind the stack when processing
exceptions; macOS also uses a custom logic to organize memory and process
exceptions; the result is that when compiling GDB with GCC on older macOS
systems (like 10.10), some details do not match and the resulting GDB
crashes with an assertion on the first `set language` command (most
probably many other commands).

The workaround was to compile GDB with Apple clang, which resulted in
functional binaries, even on the old macOS 10.10.

## More build details

The build process is split into several scripts. The build starts on the
host, with `build.sh`, which runs `container-build.sh` several times,
once for each target, in one of the two docker containers. Both scripts
include several other helper scripts. The entire process is quite complex,
and an attempt to explain its functionality in a few words would not
be realistic. Thus, the authoritative source of details remains the source
code.
